Hello, I'm Dr. Kate Deibel of Syracuse University
Libraries and I'm here today to talk about
a top technology trend to avoid:
justsay no to accessibility overlays.
Before I get into any more details, let me just
first mention that the these slides as well as
a captioned recording of this talk are available
at the following URLs and so everything will be
provided at these URLs will also be shared by
the coordinator for the top tech trends.
So I want to explain who I am to give a little
bit of a background as to why I'm talking aboutthis.
As the inclusion and accessibility librarian
at Syracuse University Libraries, I oversee
our various disability access efforts and services.
That means I oversee various aspects about
providing assistive technologies as well as
services such as providing alternative formats.
In general, though, I'm also just active in the
working to support the libraries' efforts with
diversity, equity, inclusion, and accessibility.
Overall, I have been an active advocate and speaker
for disability access in libraries and just
generally in higher education for several years.
I've included just some links about two talks I
have given in recent times about accessibility.
And here's the thing: it's not surprising
that I'm talking about disability access.
Disability access is a great thing and really it
should always be a top technology trend because
we need to always consider disability access as
well as other accessibility and equity issues
when we're thinking about technologies.
But here'sthe thing:
in this past year, particularly with thepandemic,
we've had to push to make things moreand more
accessible as we went to make thingsvirtual.
We realized that there's a lot we
could do to include more people and as we
go back to in-person work, we need to remember
not to regress and lead to poorer accessibility.
And unfortunately, there have always,
you know, whenever there's a crisis,
people look for easy answers.
And unfortunately, there are times people are out there
ready to supply easy but not necessarily trueanswers.
And in this case in this past year, we have
also seen the rise of the sham and frauds
that areaccessibility overlays
So what is an accessibilityoverlay?
Technically, it's a bit ofJavaScript code.
So, that's code that you put on a website that when
you add to it you get all these amazing claims.
One: all the accessibility issues on the site are fixedautomatically!
Then, you know and more importantly,
the website is now fully compliant with the web
accessibility guidelines (WCAG). These are the
guidelines that are the basis behind Section 508,
the Americans with Disabilities Act, and other
similar disability accommodation and access laws.
And moreover, by having the overlay on your site,
you are now protected from disability lawsuits!
If somebody tries to sue you for being inaccessible,
you can say I have an overlay therefore
nothing will be wrong! Doesn't this sound
amazing? you know it sounds like something
that should be in an infomercial.
I mean Ican kind of imagine exactly how it would go:
It'd probably go like this:
[sarcastic commercial voice]
Want to stopworrying about those pesky disabled users?
Tired of accessibility complaints and lawsuits?
Want those horrible horrid accessibility experts
like that Kate to just shut up?
Well allyou need to do is just add this small line
of JavaScript and a large amount of cash to us
and your accessibility problems can be solved!
Just just pay AccessiBe or EqualWeb or
AudioEye or any other accessibility overlay!
And there are plenty of great institutions who
are joining this as well Marymount University,
theFCCs consumer complaint center,
the United Statessocial security administration,
and if you're inthe state of Louisiana,
the department of healthuses an overlay.
Now, I will say that if you go toany of these sites
and you can't find an overlay,
that might be the case that you are running anad blocker or privacy tool that prevents theseoverlays from working.
So that's already a greatthing you have a choice between
disabilityaccess or protecting user privacy.
Ah, it's so great when we get to have to, you know, have competing demands there.
And here's the thing,you're guaranteed that you won't be sued.
It's notlike there's anyone who's actually made or pointed out
there saying that you might get sued or something like that.
Oh wait! Adrian Roselli, a leadingadvocate and spokesperson for web accessibility, published last year in June 2020
a blog postentitled "#accessiBe (one of the most common
overlay companies) will get you sued"
And in thisarticle he points out all the problems of overlays
why they do not protect you and he has updated it.
So how do you identify if a website has and is running an overlay?
Well one is to be aware of the
more popular companies out there. AccessiBe is
probably the most popular one right now but other
overlays are AudioEye,  EqualWeb, User1st, and MaxAccess.
Then generally, what you're looking for
is a button that's added to the site that
pretty much if you click on it you
get all this disability access information.
And the buttons usually take common forms.
The most common one is actually
this white stick figure in a circle
That is the recognized universal icon
for accessibility.
You might also see a stylizedperson in a wheelchair icon justlike the disabled parking signs.
And sometimes, you might see somethingdifferent. The middle icon here ,which are those
four interlaced circles, is what AudioEyes'scompany icon is.
And so just an example, you might see something even more explicit such as on theLouisiana department of health.
There's this little tab on the right side of the page that says"accessibility" that when you click on it,
it opensup to all these accessibility adjustments.
Sowhat do overlays actually do? What do they offer?
As I said, well they try to fix thedisability access issues.
And the way they do thisis one they'll offer to turn on
one or moreprofiles based upon either a disability such
as "I have ADHD so turn on everything you thinkwill help me" or "I have low vision"
Or it mightbe actually some expected interaction:
I'mgoing to be using the keyboard or a switch device.
There's also usually tools on there for adjustingthings
like make the font size bigger,
changethe font, adjust the colors.
So there's all theselittle things to tweak the page
to make yourself, you know, better for the userapparently.
And also there might actually
be a lot of changes going on underneath the
hood with the code. Primarily just in the HTML.
But why don't overlays actually work?
Well, there are several reasons for this.
One, automated accessibility testing for you
know, tends to only be able to find about 25percent
of all known accessibility issues. So, of everythingthat's cited in the web content accessibility
guidelines, you can only use software to detect
those a quarter of the time! You need a human to
actually do the testing! So this makes you wonder:
If an overlay is software how can it catch and fix
100% of issues? That's pretty amazing there!
And a bit of a mathematical impossibility!
Web frameworks such as Vue, React, and other thingsthat are used on a lot of web pages change the
page beyond what the overlay can actually reachor affect.
This software (Vue, React, and
a few others) do things that intentionally forsecurity reasons.
The way that these overlays
work with JavaScript, they can't change anything
so they won't actually work on those sites.
Moreover, browsers already actually provide tools
for customizing things like fonts, text colors,
zoom, any of that. And here's those things the
overlays will not fix: things that you're linked
to like PDFs, Word documents, PowerPoints and you
can actually forget about it actually say
adding captions to videos. There's still plenty
of things on the web, lots of content on the web,
that are not affected by overlays.
There's evenother reasons why overlays don't work. First of
all is one of the classic examples in that images
need good accessible descriptions. They need good
alternative text, and AI technique can only doso much in terms of accuracy. I mean it can;
we've got a lot better to be able to read textin images, so that's good. But to  be able to identify
individual objects, it's not always going to beaccurate.
And most importantly, image descriptions
are not just a description of the image! Theyneed to be relevant to the context. You might
be having an image of say a scatter plot or
bar chart and the purpose of it might actually
be as to present that data but it might just bethis is an example of a scatter plot.
Or you know you could have an image, you know, an image that is a painting by Van Gogh and
you might actually be wanting to just be anexample of work by Van Gogh or you might be
highlighting some artistic aspect of that work
such as his use of color or texture. There's a
lot in there that when you write alt text , it'snot as some---you need to think about the context.
And here's the other thing too.
Overlays arebasically an excuse to not do not do the hard work.
It basically says that "Hey, you know all
these accessibility fixes? We don't need to do it!"
"We can just, you know, let our code be
as horrible as it needs to be. We can't follow
these guidelines or advice out there or bestpractices. We will continue to create crappy sites."
"And everything will be fixed."
But they aren't! Andhere's the big thing:
A lot of screen readers andother assistive technologies get blocked by theseoverlays. It's actually---can be more difficult to
use a screen reader on a website with anoverlay versus the same site without the overlay.
And of course, there are plenty of
complaints out there by disabled users.
One twitter post from GeauxEnder. He says "thatwith 100% certainty, any site which has deployed
an overlay in the past year and a half has been
less usable for both my wife and me--both blind."
CatchTheseWords talks about on how thewebsite adds all this superfluous
information on the site. It makes it extremelydifficult and slow to use the page. In fact, it
actually tends to screw up things like tables.
And VICE magazine published an entire article
about people with disabilities saying
AccessiBe is making the web worse for them.
And of course then, accessibility experts also
say no to overlays in a survey of web
accessibility practitioners in January 2021,
WebAim found that 60 i mean 67 percent of web
accessibility practitioners find web accessibility
overlays not very or not at all effective.
Only three percent of them found them very effective.
And if you and if you restricted that to those
practitioners who identified as having a
disability, it went up to 72 percent of them
find found that overlays were not effective and
only 2 percent found them to be very effective.
So what we have here just showing that there's a
lot of that recognizing that they're not doing the job.
And experts have plenty more to say@ The article
that I mentioned earlier by Adrian Roselli
"AccessiBe will get you sued
is one that
everyone should read but there are other great
articles out there. I chose a few of these
and in particularly the Overlay Fact Sheet
was created by Karl Grobes and does a complete
rundown of all the problems with overlays
and has so far as of June 1st has been signed by
441 accessibility advocates, myself included.
So here's what it is: Accessibility overlays will
not magically fix all your accessibility problems
You can and will receive complaints
or lawsuits even with them
Invest your money instead on making your site
accessible now. The web content accessibility
guidelines are over 20 years old. There really
is no excuse and please please just say no
to accessibility overlays or Fiona, this scary-looking tuxedo cat with her face cast in. shadows
will find you. Yeah, Fiona is my cat and
she appears in all my accessibilitytalks.
Thank you. Here's some contact informationfor me. Please go ahead and reach out if
you have accessibility questions in libraries. I
love talking about this so thank you very much.